---
layout: distill
title:  ICC-introduction
date: 2024-05-26 9:00:00
description: Introduction to computational chemistry. Notes of Chapter01
tags: computationalchem 
categories: computationalchem

bibliography: 2024-05-13-ff_mt.bib

toc:
  - name: Fundamental issues
  - name: Describe the system 
  - name: Fundamental forces(potential)
  - name: Dynamical equations
  - name: Solve the dynamic equations
  - name: SOV separation of variables
  - name: Hydrogen liked atoms(1 e)
  - name: Helium atom(2 es)
  - name: Chemistry
---

What it can do?  

* Optimal structure
* Energies
* Properties(dipole moment, polarizability, NMR coupling constants)
* Reaction kinetics
* Propogates with time
* Interactions and reactions

## Fundamental issues

**Solving the many-body problem**  with a computer.  

Computers can do:  

* Mathematical operations
* Branching (N>10)
* Looping
* Reading and writing data

## Describe the system  

There are 4 problems to consider:  

* System description: what is the fundamental units(particles) and how many are them?
* Initial conditions: particles positions and velocities(defined by dynamical equations, becareful of the isomers place your atoms in the right place).  
* Interactions: the force
* Dynamical equations

Hierarchy:  

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2024-05-26-icc01/hierarchy.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

## Fundamental forces(potential)

$$\mathbf F(\mathbf r) = -\frac{\partial \mathbf V}{\partial \mathbf r}$$

There are 4 fundamental interactions, weak, strong, electromagnetic, gravitational.  

The weak and electromagnetic can be combined and computed by ***Q.E.D.***.  
**Q.E.D.+strong interactions = Standard model**  

## Dynamical equations

Domains  

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2024-05-26-icc01/dynamic_domains.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

**Sometimes relativistic mechanics, quantum effects, or a combinations of them needs to be considered.**  

There are some detailed discussion on the equations please refer to the book page 8.  

## Solve the dynamic equations

We cannot solve the dynamic equations analytically with there are >= 3 bodies. *Classic 3-body problem*.  

**Verlet algorithm**  

$$r_{i+1} = r_i + v_i(\Delta t) + \frac{1}{2}a_i(\Delta t)^2 + \frac{1}{6}b_i(\Delta t)^3+ ... $$  

$$r_{i-1} = r_i - v_i(\Delta t) + \frac{1}{2}a_i(\Delta t)^2 - \frac{1}{6}b_i(\Delta t)^3+ ... $$  

$$r_{i+1} = (2r_i - r_{i-1}) + a_i(\Delta t)^2 + ...  $$  

All the odd terms disappear.  

Hyperparameter: $\Delta t$  
Just for reference:  Hydrogen vibrations ocur with a typical frequency of $3000cm^{-1}$ (Just think about IR spectroscopy diagram C-H).  corresponding to $~10^{14}s^{-1}$.  So it is resonable to choose the time scale of $\Delta t = 10{-15} s$  

## SOV separation of variables

**Step 1:**  

Introduce the ***center of mass*** system.  

* For a 2-body system, we can separate the variables by introducing the center of mass system. This is not valid for 3-or-more-body systems. Approximations needs to be made.  
* Born-Oppenheimer(infinitely heavy nuclei)
* Hartree-Fock: Average repulsion of electrons  

### Separating time and space variables

General form:  

$$\bm H(\bm r, t)\Psi(\bm r, t) = i \frac{\partial \Psi(\bm r,t)}{\partial t}$$  
$$\bm H(\bm r, t) = \bm T(\bm r) + \bm V(\bm r, t)$$
Note: There is no time dependence in momentum operater. $\bm T$ stands for kinetic energy and $\bm V$ stands for potential energy.  

For a bounded system, we because of the postulate of isotropic of time. The potential which is a combination of fundamental forces can be time invariant.  

$$\bm H(\bm r, t) = \bm H(\bm r) = \bm T(\bm r) + \bm V(\bm r)$$

$$\bm H(\bm r)\Psi(\bm r, t) = E(\bm r)\Psi(\bm r, t)$$  
Note: the $\bm H(\bm r)$ is an operater that act on wave function.  the $E(\bm r)$ is just a constant.  This actually means the energy is an eigenvalue of time-invariant Schudinger equation.  

$$\bm H(\bm r)\Psi(\bm r, t) = E(\bm r)\Psi(\bm r, t) = i \frac{\partial\Psi(\bm r, t)}{\partial t}$$  

$$\Psi(\bm r, t) = \Psi(\bm r)e^{-iEt}$$

### Separating nuclear and electronic variables

$$H = T + V$$  

Assuming a N-partical system.  

$$ \bm T = \sum_{i = 1}^{N}\bm T_i = -\sum_{i = 1}^{N}\frac{1}{2m_i}\nabla ^2_i$$  

$$ \bm V = \sum_{i > j} V_{ij} $$  

If we denote the position of the nuclear coordinate with $\bm R$ and electron nuclear with $\bm r$:  
$$\bm H_{tot}\Psi_{tot}(\bm R, \bm r) = E_{tot}\Psi_{tot}(\bm R, \bm r) $$  

$$\bm H_{tot} = \bm H_{e} + \bm T_{n}$$  
Here the \bm H_{e} is not only the Hamiltonian of electron but a large combination of electron and nucleus interactions.  
$$\bm H_{e} = \bm T_{e} + \bm V_{ne} + \bm V_{nn} +\bm V_{ee} $$  

Why we split the total Hamiltonian into $\bm H_e and \bm T_n$. The reason is that we will not take the famous assumption, ***Born-Oppenheimer approximation***: *the electronic wave function thus depends parametrically on the nuclear coordinates since it only depends on the position of the nuclei, not on the momentum*. This means that the electrons only goes with the nuclei, for electrons the nuclei is so heavy and slow that it seems stationary. This means:

* We can provide a potential energy surface around a nuclei(Actually most of people just take this for granted, especially sb study chemistry and have seen so many potential diagrams).

* $$\Psi_{tot}(\bm R, \bm r) = \Psi_n(\bm R)\Psi_e(\bm R, \bm r)$$  

And the original$\bm H_{tot}\Psi_{tot}(\bm R, \bm r) = E_{tot}\Psi_{tot}(\bm R, \bm r) $  equation can be separated into 2 equations:  
$$\bm H_{tot}\Psi_n(\bm R)\Psi_e(\bm R, \bm r) = E_{tot}\Psi_n(\bm R)\Psi_e(\bm R, \bm r) $$
$$(\bm H_{e} + \bm T_{n})\Psi_n(\bm R)\Psi_e(\bm R, \bm r) = E_{tot}\Psi_n(\bm R)\Psi_e(\bm R, \bm r) $$
Assuming that $E_{tot} = E_e + E_{n,e}$  

* $$\bm H_e \Psi_e(\bm R, \bm r) = E_e(\bm R)\Psi_e(\bm R, \bm r)$$  
Note again that the $\bm H_e$ is not only about electrons. It seems that the nucleus is treated a purely stable and the energy is only composed of potential and velocity of electrons.  

* $$(\bm T_n + E_e(\bm R)) \Psi_n(\bm R) = E_{tot} \Psi_n(\bm R)$$

**Generally**  

$$\bm H = \sum_i \bm h_i$$
$$\bm \Psi_i = \prod_i \phi_i$$
$$E = \sum_i \epsilon_i $$  

## Hydrogen liked atoms(1 e)

* Solve Schrodinger equation with $\bm V(r_{1,2} = \frac{q_1q_2}{r_12})$
* Quantum effect(n,l,m)comes from the zero-point of triangular functions.  
* Orthogonalality of the orbitals:
  * $$\langle \Psi_{n,l,m}| \Psi_{n^{\prime},l^{\prime},m^{\prime}}\rangle = \delta_{n,n^{\prime}}\delta_{l,l^{\prime}}\delta_{m,m^{\prime}}$$

## Helium atom(2 es)

Different from hydrogen atom there 2 electrons a series of problems may raise.  

### Symmetry of the wavefunctions

For indistinguishable particles, no matter it is Fermions or Bosons, probability should not change:

$$|\psi(2,1)|^2 = |\psi(1,2)|^2 $$

This means the wave function can be symmetric(**Bosons**, interger spins) or anti-symmetric(**Fermions**, half interger spins)  

* Symmetric: $\psi(2,1) = \psi(1,2)$  
* Anti-symmetric: $\psi(2,1) = -\psi(1,2)$

If we ***do not consider the interaction of each pair of particles***. The system wavefunctions are:  
$$\psi (1,2,3,...n) = \psi (1)\psi (2)\psi (3)...\psi (n)$$  

Furthermore, if we have 2 quantum states $a$ and $b$, then the wave function can be expressed as a linear combination of the 2 parts:  

$$\psi_I = \psi_a(1)\psi_b(2)$$
$$\psi_{II} = \psi_a(2)\psi_b(1)$$

* Symmertric: $$\psi_s = \frac{1}{\sqrt 2}(\psi_a(1)\psi_b(2)+\psi_a(2)\psi_b(1))$$  
* Anti-symmetric: $$\psi_{as} = \frac{1}{\sqrt 2}(\psi_a(1)\psi_b(2)-\psi_a(2)\psi_b(1))$$  

Look carefully the anti-symmetric function, it can be expressed in a form just as determinant. This is called ***Slater determinant***:  

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2024-05-26-icc01/slater.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

Note: Only the $\bm V_{ne}$ is considered in this expression. $\bm V_{ee}$ is not considered.  

Then for the case of electrons:  
**Electron is Fermion**  

### Electron interactions

$\bm V_{ee}$ is hard to measure. A better approximation can be obtained by taking the average repulsion between the electrons into account when determining the orbitals, a procedure known as the ***Hartree–Fock*** approximation.  

Hartree–Fock method is not accurate enough(99%).  There is still a remaining term called the ***correlation energy*** This term takes instaneous interaction into account.  

## Chemistry

**Chemistry is knowing the energy as a function of the nuclear coordinates. Born-Oppenheimer approximation**  
**Properties are knowing how the energy changes upon adding a perturbation.**  

