---
layout: distill
title:  Mass transfer and diffusion
date: 2024-05-13 9:00:00
description: Introduction to fluid-fluid mass transfer with comparison between different models and an introduction to Maxwell Stefan law
tags: masstransfer
categories: masstransfer

bibliography: 2024-05-13-ff_mt.bib

toc:
  - name: Basic concepts and definitions
  - name: Fick's law and mass balance
  - name: Diffusivity in various situations
  - name: Fluid-fluid mass transfer
  - name: General driving forces & (Onsager-)Maxwell-stefan equations  
---

## Basic concepts and definitions

Before we start let just review some concepts:  

There are 2 kinds of diffusion we consider in the system.  

***molecular diffusion*** by **random and spontaneous microscpoic movement of molecules** of thermo motion occurs in fluid that is **stagnant or in laminar motion**. The process is **slow**.  
***eddy diffusion*** by **random macroscopic fluid motion** occurs when **fluid mixing in a turbulent motion**. This is a fast process.  

Also, mass transfer contains convection.*convection* by bulk flow.  

$J$: molar diffusion flux density  
$N$：molar flux density  

## Fick's law and mass balance

To start with, if we do not go from *Maxwell-Stefan's theory* everything starts with 2 basic thoughts. We use different forms of the 2 equations here and there. Please remember this in your mind **Mass transport analogues to heat transfer** in many ways!  

### Fick's law and mutual diffusivity

We just assume that a driving force result in a linear responding. Which is exactly the *Fick's law*  
\begin{equation}  
J_A = -D_{AB}\nabla c_A
\end{equation}  

\begin{equation} J_B = -D_{BA}\nabla c_B\end{equation}  
\begin{equation} D_{AB} = D_{BA}\end{equation}  

$D$ is in $m^2/s$, $c$ is in $[anyunit]/m^3$  

There are other forms of Fick's law:
\begin{equation} J_A = -cD_{AB}\nabla x_A\end{equation}  
or  
\begin{equation}j_A = -\rho D_{AB}\nabla w_A\end{equation}  

$w_A$ is the mass fraction of A. $\rho * w = kg/m^3* kg(A)/kg(solution) = m_A/v_{solution}$  

### Mass balance in a control volume

Consider a classic mass balance problem in a controled volume.  

\begin{equation}\frac{\partial c_A}{\partial t} = \nabla\end{equation}  

### Fick's second law

Combine the first 2 equations, we have the Fick's second law:  

\begin{equation}\frac{\partial c_A}{\partial t} = - \nabla^2 c_A\end{equation}  

### Species velocities

$\mathcal Def$: molar avearge mixture velocity  

\begin{equation}v_M = \frac{N}{c} = \frac{\sum N_i}{c}\end{equation}  

$\mathcal Def$: velocity of species i in terms of $N_i$

\begin{equation}v_M = \frac{N_i}{c_i}\end{equation}  

Thus  
\begin{equation}v_M =  \frac{\sum N_i}{c} = \sum\frac{c_i}{c}\frac{ N_i}{c_i} = \sum x_i v_i\end{equation}  

$\mathcal Def$:  Diffusion velocity  

\begin{equation}v_{i_D} = \frac{J_i}{c_i} = \frac{N_i - N_{i,conv}}{c_i} = v_i - v_M
\end{equation}  

Note: $N_{i,conv} \neq N$  

\begin{equation}  
v_i = v_M+v_{i_D}
\end{equation}  
\begin{equation}  
N_i = c_iv_M+c_iv_{i_D}
\end{equation}  

For a binary system,  
\begin{equation}  
N_A = \frac{n_A}{A} = x_AN- cD_{AB}\nabla{x_A}
\end{equation}  

### Equimolar Conterdiffusion(EMD)  

EMD means that the molar fluxes are equal but in opposite direction. The result predicts linearity in mole fraction and distance.  
This a little bit like **Distillation* process with operation line is a straight line. The contration profile is just as the graph shows.  

<div class="row mt-5">
    <div class="col-sm mt-5 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid loading="eager" path="assets/img/2024-05-13-ff_mt/image.png" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

### Unimolecular Diffusion (UMD)

In this case, there is only 1 species moving, the other species stay still.  

## Diffusivity in various situations

There are many both empirical and theoretical relationships for estimation of diffusivity in Gas nonelecteolyte liquid, electrolyte, biological solutions, different solids.  

## Fluid-fluid mass transfer

### Film theory

This is the theory for a real mass transfer case like a thin film, such as Stagnent layer of a laminar sublayer (层流边界层的传质).  
Becareful that **Phase equilibrium** exist between stagnent layer and the 2 sides which means that there is a sharp change of concentration in the boundary of film.  

### Penetration Theory

This is a different model for better estimation than film theory.  

The film is no more stagnent but replaced by Boussinesq eddies. This means the transport can no more be approximated by an integration in the case of film theory but a PDE problem needs to be solved to get the time response.  A typical boundary condition is the **semi-infinite medium**.  

* An element of liquid initially at $c_{Ab}$ is suddenly exposed to $c_i$, the interface contration.  
* All elements have the same contact time.  
* Thick film diffusion, infinite liquid and short contact time.  
* In the direction of diffusion($z$): diffusion > convection.
* In the direction of bulk flow ($x$): convection > diffusion. 

The model is useful for bubbles, droplets, or random packing interfaces. One can estimate the contact time in this theory and there are models to first estimate the contact time and use the result to predict the diffusion process.  

### Surface-Renewal Theory

The Penetration model assumes a fixed contact time but for bubbles with different sizes, the contact time is not the same. There should be a contact time distribution.  

* Liquid elements now exposed at a surface that would be renewed at random times.  
* The probability of any element of surface becoming destroyed and mixed with bulk of the fluid is independent of the age of the element.  

$\mathcal Def$: Rate of production of fresh [surface per unit total area]

$f(t)$: contact time distribution for liquid elements at surface rate of production.  

$$Number\ or\ fraction\ of\ molecules = fraction\ from\ previous\ interval - fraction\ renewed$$  
This equation is analogous to the equation for CSTR reactor.  

\begin{equation}
f(t)dt = f(t-dt)dt- sf(t-dt)
\end{equation}

\begin{equation}
\frac{df(t)}{dt} = -sf(t)
\end{equation}

After normalization:  $\int_0^\infty f(t) = 1$  

\begin{equation}
f(t) = se^{-st}
\end{equation}

### 2-film theory & overall mass transfer coefficient

This is just the same of dense member mass transfer with consideration of phase equilibrium.We can define permeability or permeance.  

* Steady dtate  
* Const flux  
* Stagnent films exist  
* 2 phase are in eq at interphase  

## General driving forces & (Onsager-)Maxwell-stefan equations  

There are other driving forces beyond concentration gradient.  

